.TH MLISP\-ADMIN 1 "June 2026" "mlisp 0.8" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mlisp\-admin \- mlisp mailing list administration tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mlisp\-admin
[\fB\-\-home\fR \fIdir\fR]
\fIsubcommand\fR
[\fIargs\fR ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mlisp\-admin
manages mlisp list configuration, subscribers, moderation queues,
and operational state.  All changes are written to
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/state.sexp
and logged to
.IR $MLISP_HOME/state/audit.sexp .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-home " dir"
Override the state directory.  Equivalent to setting
.BR MLISP_HOME .
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.SS Initialisation
.TP
.B init [\-\-dir \fIpath\fR]
Scaffold a new MLISP_HOME directory with seed state, default templates,
and example procmail recipes.
.SS Namespace management
.TP
.B add\-namespace \fIname\fR \fIbase\-address\fR [\-\-subgroups \fIsg1,sg2,...\fR]
Create all nine standard subgroups for the namespace \fIname\fR.
Addresses are formed as \fIname\-subgroup@domain\fR where domain is
taken from \fIbase\-address\fR.
.TP
.B list\-namespace \fIname\fR
Show all subgroups in the \fIname\fR namespace with their addresses
and subscriber counts.
.SS List management
.TP
.B add\-list \fIlist\-id\fR \fIdrop\-address\fR
Add a new list record with the given drop address.
.TP
.B rm\-list \fIlist\-id\fR
Remove a list record and all its state files.
.TP
.B list\-lists
Print all list IDs with their drop addresses and subscriber counts.
.TP
.B rename\-list \fIold\-id\fR \fInew\-id\fR
Rename a list, updating its ID and drop address prefix.
.TP
.B copy\-list \fIsrc\-id\fR \fIdst\-id\fR
Clone the configuration of \fIsrc\-id\fR to a new list \fIdst\-id\fR.
Subscribers are not copied.
.TP
.B list\-stats \fIlist\-id\fR [\-\-since \fIYYYY\-MM\-DD\fR]
Print message distribution, hold, subscribe, and bounce counts
from the audit log for \fIlist\-id\fR.
.SS Configuration
.TP
.B set\-option \fIlist\-id\fR \fIkey\fR \fIvalue\fR
Set a list configuration option.  Common keys:
.RS
.TP
.B max\-message\-size\-kb
Maximum message size in kilobytes.  0 = unlimited.
.TP
.B reply\-to\-munging
One of \fInone\fR (preserve), \fIlist\fR (list address),
or \fIposter\fR (original sender).
.TP
.B non\-member\-action
One of \fIreject\fR (default), \fIhold\fR, or \fIdiscard\fR.
.TP
.B dmarc\-rewrite
One of \fInever\fR (default), \fIalways\fR, or \fIauto\fR (DNS check).
.TP
.B verp
.I true
to enable VERP bounce tracking.
.TP
.B confirm\-subscribe
.I true
(default) for double opt\-in, or
.I false
for immediate subscribe.
.TP
.B confirm\-window\-hours
Confirmation token expiry in hours.  Default: 48.
.TP
.B message\-numbering
.I true
to append \fI#NNN\fR sequence number to subject.
.TP
.B max\-posts\-per\-day
Rate limit: maximum posts per sender per 24 hours.  0 = unlimited.
.TP
.B rate\-limit\-action
One of \fIhold\fR (default), \fIreject\fR, or \fIdiscard\fR.
.TP
.B attachment\-policy
One of \fIallow\fR (default), \fIstrip\fR, or \fIreject\fR.
.TP
.B subject\-allow
Subject pattern that posts must match.  String or list.
.TP
.B subject\-deny
Subject pattern that causes posts to be held/rejected.  String or list.
.TP
.B subject\-filter\-action
One of \fIhold\fR (default), \fIreject\fR, or \fIdiscard\fR.
.TP
.B unsubscribe\-url
HTTPS URL for RFC 8058 one\-click unsubscribe endpoint.
.TP
.B pre\-filter
Path to a filter program (or space\-separated list) invoked before all processing.
Exit 0 = pass; exit 1 = reject; exit 2 = hold; exit 3 = discard.
.TP
.B post\-filter
Path to a filter program invoked after header assembly but before distribution.
Exit 0 = continue (with modified message); any other exit = ignored.
.TP
.B search\-enabled
.I true
to enable \fIsearch\fR, \fIindex\fR, and \fIget\fR commands against the Maildir archive.
.TP
.B advertised
.I true
to allow the \fIwho\fR command to return the subscriber list.
.TP
.B archive\-url
URL of the list archive (written to \fIList\-Archive:\fR header).
.TP
.B owner\-address
Email address of the list owner.
.TP
.B bot\-address
Authorised bot address for \fI:commits\fR subgroup.
.TP
.B bounce\-window\-days
Multigram bounce window.  Default: 30 days.
.TP
.B hash\-contacts
.I true
to store subscriber addresses as SHA\-256 hashes.
.TP
.B require\-signed
.I true
to require GPG\-signed posts.
.RE
.TP
.B show\-config \fIlist\-id\fR
Print the current configuration for \fIlist\-id\fR.
.SS Subscriber management
.TP
.B add\-sub \fIlist\-id\fR \fIaddress\fR
Add a subscriber.  Consent method: \fIadmin\-add\fR.
.TP
.B rm\-sub \fIlist\-id\fR \fIaddress\fR
Remove a subscriber.  Writes erasure audit event.
.TP
.B list\-subs \fIlist\-id\fR
Print all subscribers with subscription timestamp, consent method,
and \fI[NOMAIL]\fR flag where applicable.
.TP
.B add\-sub\-batch \fIlist\-id\fR [\fIfile\fR]
Bulk add subscribers from \fIfile\fR or standard input.  One address
per line.  Supports \fIName <address>\fR format.  Blank lines and
lines beginning with \fI#\fR are skipped.  Idempotent.
.TP
.B rm\-sub\-batch \fIlist\-id\fR [\fIfile\fR]
Bulk remove subscribers from \fIfile\fR or standard input.
.TP
.B set\-nomail \fIlist\-id\fR \fIaddress\fR \fItrue\fR|\fIfalse\fR
Set or clear the NOMAIL flag for a subscriber.
.SS Subscriber self-service (via \-request address)
The following commands are processed when a subscriber sends email to the
\fI\-request\fR address.  These commands are for end users, not administrators.
.TP
.B info
Send list description, addresses, and command reference to the sender.
.TP
.B who [\fIlist\-id\fR]
Send the subscriber list if \fI:advertised t\fR; otherwise a not\-advertised notice.
.TP
.B query [\fIlist\-id\fR]
Send the sender\(cqs own delivery settings (mode, NOMAIL flag, bounce count).
.TP
.B set \fIlist\-id\fR mail|nomail|digest
Change the sender\(cqs delivery mode.
.TP
.B search \fIkeyword\fR [in \fIlist\-id\fR]
Search the Maildir archive for messages matching \fIkeyword\fR (requires \fI:search\-enabled t\fR).
.TP
.B index [\fIlist\-id\fR]
List available archived messages with subjects and dates.
.TP
.B get \fIlist\-id\fR \fIN\fR
Retrieve archived message number \fIN\fR.
.TP
.B files [\fIlist\-id\fR]
List files available in the \fI\-distrib\fR archive (AllFix FILES.BBS equivalent).
.SS Confirmation tokens
.TP
.B show\-pending \fIlist\-id\fR
List pending double opt\-in confirmation tokens with expiry.
.TP
.B clear\-pending \fIlist\-id\fR
Remove expired confirmation tokens.
.SS Moderation
.TP
.B hold\-queue \fIlist\-id\fR
List held messages with sequence numbers.
.TP
.B approve \fIlist\-id\fR \fIseq\fR
Distribute a held message.
.TP
.B reject \fIlist\-id\fR \fIseq\fR
Discard a held message.
.TP
.B lock \fIlist\-id\fR [\-\-reason \fItext\fR]
Lock a list.  All inbound posts are held until unlocked.
.TP
.B unlock \fIlist\-id\fR
Remove the lock from a list.
.SS Embargo
.TP
.B embargo \fIlist\-id\fR \fIISO8601\-date\fR
Hold all posts to \fIlist\-id\fR until the given release date.
Typically used with \fI:security\fR subgroups.
.PP
Example:
.PP
.RS
mlisp\-admin embargo mlisp\-security 2026\-09\-15T12:00:00
.RE
.TP
.B release\-embargo \fIlist\-id\fR
Release the embargo immediately.  Held posts are made available
for review; approve them individually with
.BR hold\-queue / approve .
.SS Bounce management
.TP
.B show\-bounces \fIlist\-id\fR
Print subscribers with non\-zero bounce counts.
.TP
.B clear\-bounces \fIlist\-id\fR [\fIaddress\fR]
Reset bounce count for one subscriber or all subscribers.
.SS Digest
.TP
.B flush\-digest \fIlist\-id\fR
Distribute the accumulated digest immediately.  Run via cron
to schedule digest delivery.
.SS Deduplication
.TP
.B show\-dedup \fIlist\-id\fR
Print the recent Message\-ID ring buffer.
.TP
.B clear\-dedup \fIlist\-id\fR
Clear the deduplication ring buffer.
.SS Exploder
.TP
.B add\-exploder \fIumbrella\-id\fR \fImember\-id\fR [\fImember\-id\fR ...]
Configure \fIumbrella\-id\fR as an exploder list that redistributes
to each named member list.
.SS Distribution (mlisp\-distrib)
.TP
.B add\-distrib \fIlist\-id\fR \fIfile\fR
Add a file to the distribution archive for \fIlist\-id\fR.
.TP
.B hatch \fIlist\-id\fR \fIfile\fR [\fI\-\-description text\fR]
Add \fIfile\fR to the distribution archive and announce it to all subscribers.
Equivalent to AllFix HATCH/TIC processing.
.SS VERP
.TP
.B verp\-decode \fIverp\-address\fR
Decode a VERP\-encoded bounce return address to the original subscriber address.
.PP
Example:
.PP
.RS
mlisp\-admin verp\-decode mlisp\-discuss+ab12cd34=alice=example.com@panix.com
.br
alice@example.com
.RE
.SS Export
.TP
.B export\-ldif \fIlist\-id\fR [\-\-base\-dn \fIDN\fR] [\-\-output \fIfile.ldif\fR]
Export subscriber list as RFC 2849 LDIF
.I groupOfNames
entry.
.TP
.B export\-csv \fIlist\-id\fR [\-\-output \fIfile.csv\fR] [\-\-include\-nomail]
Export subscriber list as RFC 4180 CSV with headers:
\fIaddress, subscribed_at, consent_method, bounce_count, nomail, last_bounce_at\fR.
.SS Diagnosis
.TP
.B diagnose \fIlist\-id\fR
Print a full health report: subscriber counts, bounce statistics,
lock/moderation status, configuration summary, and missing templates.
.SS Procmail
.TP
.B install\-procmail [\-\-dry\-run] [\-\-list \fIlist\-id\fR]
Append procmail recipes to \fI~/.procmailrc\fR.  With \fI\-\-dry\-run\fR,
print recipes without modifying the file.  With \fI\-\-list\fR, install
only the recipes for the named list.
.SS Bug tracker (mlisp\-bugs)
.TP
.B bugs\-add\-package \fIpkg\fR \fIsubmit\-addr\fR [\-\-owner \fIaddr\fR]
Register a bug package. \fIsubmit\-addr\fR is the submission email address
(e.g. \fImyproject\-bugs\-submit@lists.example.com\fR).
.TP
.B install\-bugs\-procmail \fIpkg\fR [\-\-dry\-run]
Append the four procmail recipes (submit/close/append/control) for
\fIpkg\fR to \fI~/.procmailrc\fR.
.TP
.B bugs\-list \fIpkg\fR [\-\-open] [\-\-closed] [\-\-severity \fIS\fR] [\-\-tag \fIT\fR]
List bugs for \fIpkg\fR, optionally filtered.
.TP
.B bugs\-show \fIpkg\fR \fIN\fR
Show full details and message thread for bug #\fIN\fR.
.TP
.B bugs\-report \fIpkg\fR [\-\-open] [\-\-closed] [\-\-severity \fIS\fR] [\-\-tag \fIT\fR] [\-\-summarize \fIcmd\fR]
Generate a bug report. With \fI\-\-summarize \fIcmd\fR\fR, pipe through
\fIcmd\fR and append output as a Summary section.
.TP
.B bugs\-list\-packages
List all registered bug packages.
.SS Metrics
.TP
.B export\-metrics
Print Prometheus\-format metrics for all lists.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Zero\-config initialisation (XDG default, ~/.config/mlisp/):
.PP
.RS
.nf
mlisp\-admin init
mlisp\-admin add\-namespace myproj myproj@example.com
mlisp\-admin install\-procmail
mlisp\-admin diagnose myproj\-discuss
.fi
.RE
.PP
Configure a list for a public project (DMARC\-safe, double opt\-in):
.PP
.RS
.nf
mlisp\-admin set\-option myproj\-discuss dmarc\-rewrite auto
mlisp\-admin set\-option myproj\-discuss reply\-to\-munging list
mlisp\-admin set\-option myproj\-discuss unsubscribe\-url https://lists.example.com/unsub/myproj\-discuss
.fi
.RE
.PP
Bulk import subscribers from a Mailman export:
.PP
.RS
mlisp\-admin add\-sub\-batch myproj\-discuss members.txt
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mlisp (1),
.BR mlisp\-bugs (1),
.BR mlisp\-procmail\-gen (1),
.BR mlisp\-distrib (1),
.BR mlisp\-intro (7)
.SH AUTHORS
Dwight Spencer <dwight@dapla.net>
.br
Da Planet Security \(em https://dapla.net/
