.TH MLISP\-PROCMAIL\-GEN 1 "June 2026" "mlisp 0.8" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mlisp\-procmail\-gen \- s\-expr DSL compiler for procmailrc recipes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mlisp\-procmail\-gen
.RB [ \-\-output
.IR path ]
.RB [ \-\-dry\-run ]
.I recipe\-file.lisp
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mlisp\-procmail\-gen
reads a Lisp source file containing
.B :recipe
or
.B :recipe\-set
forms and emits procmail recipe blocks.
.PP
With
.B \-\-output
it appends to the target file idempotently, skipping any recipe whose
.B :marker
comment is already present (safe to run repeatedly).
.PP
Without
.B \-\-output
it prints to stdout, suitable for piping or redirection.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-output \fIpath\fR
Append generated recipes to \fIpath\fR.  Idempotent via the
\fB# <marker>\fR comment line at the top of each recipe block.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
With \fB\-\-output\fR: show what would be appended without writing.
Has no effect without \fB\-\-output\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print usage and exit 0.
.SH RECIPE DSL
A recipe is a plist beginning with
.BR :recipe :
.PP
.RS
.nf
(:recipe
  :marker  "mlisp: myproject\-discuss"
  :guards  ("!^FROM_DAEMON" "!^FROM_MAILER"
            "!^Precedence: (bulk|junk|list)")
  :match   "^^TO_myproject\-discuss@lists.example.com"
  :pipe    "/usr/local/bin/mlisp \-\-home /etc/mlisp myproject\-discuss")
.fi
.RE
.PP
A
.B :recipe\-set
groups multiple recipes printed together:
.PP
.RS
.nf
(:recipe\-set
  (:recipe :marker "mlisp: myproject\-discuss" ...)
  (:recipe :marker "mlisp: myproject\-request" ...))
.fi
.RE
.PP
Fields:
.TP
.B :marker
String placed as a comment on the first line of the recipe block.
Used for idempotency checking when
.B \-\-output
is given.
.TP
.B :guards
List of procmail condition lines prefixed with
.BR * .
.TP
.B :match
Procmail condition line (prefixed with
.BR * ).
.TP
.B :pipe
Shell command passed to procmail's
.B |
action.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Generate and append all list recipes, then preview without writing:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mlisp\-procmail\-gen \-\-output ~/.procmailrc recipes.lisp
mlisp\-procmail\-gen \-\-dry\-run recipes.lisp
.fi
.RE
.PP
Use
.B mlisp\-admin install\-procmail
as an alternative for single\-list procmailrc generation without a
separate recipe file.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mlisp (1),
.BR mlisp\-admin (1),
.BR procmailrc (5)
.SH AUTHORS
Dwight Spencer <dwight@dapla.net>
.br
Da Planet Security \(em https://dapla.net/
