.TH MLISP\-BUGS 1 "June 2026" "mlisp 0.8" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mlisp\-bugs \- Debbugs\-compatible email bug tracker for mlisp
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mlisp\-bugs
.B \-\-mode
.I mode
.I pkg
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mlisp\-bugs
processes email submitted to a bug package's wire addresses.
Bugs are stored as Maildir messages; state is derived by scanning
the archive, exactly as Debbugs does.
.PP
Use
.BR mlisp\-admin (1)
to manage packages and query bug state.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-home \fIdir\fR
Override the config/state directory (default: XDG or /etc/mlisp).
.TP
.B \-\-mode submit
Accept a new bug report submitted to \fIpkg\fR\-bugs\-submit@.
.TP
.B \-\-mode close
Mark bug N as closed; called via \fIpkg\fR\-bugs\-N\-done@.
.TP
.B \-\-mode append
Append a follow\-up message to bug N; called via \fIpkg\fR\-bugs\-N@.
.TP
.B \-\-mode control
Process Debbugs control commands submitted to \fIpkg\fR\-bugs\-control@.
.SH WIRE ADDRESSES
.TP
.I pkg\-bugs\-submit@host
Submit a new bug.  The message body should include
.B Package:
and optionally
.B Severity:
pseudo-headers.
.TP
.I pkg\-bugs\-N@host
Append a message to bug #N.
.TP
.I pkg\-bugs\-N\-done@host
Close bug #N.
.TP
.I pkg\-bugs\-control@host
Send Debbugs control commands (severity, tags, close, reopen,
retitle, owner, forwarded, block, merge, quit).
.SH CONTROL COMMANDS
.TP
.B severity \fIN\fR \fIsev\fR
Set severity of bug #N to \fIsev\fR (critical, serious, grave, normal, minor, wishlist).
.TP
.B tags \fIN\fR \fItag ...\fR
Add tags to bug #N.
.TP
.B close \fIN\fR
Close bug #N.
.TP
.B reopen \fIN\fR
Reopen bug #N.
.TP
.B retitle \fIN\fR \fItitle\fR
Change the title of bug #N.
.TP
.B owner \fIN\fR \fIaddr\fR
Set the owner of bug #N.
.TP
.B forwarded \fIN\fR \fIurl\fR
Mark bug #N as forwarded upstream.
.TP
.B block \fIN\fR by \fIM ...\fR
Mark bug #N as blocked by bugs M...
.TP
.B merge \fIN\fR \fIM ...\fR
Merge bugs N and M.
.TP
.B quit
Stop processing further control commands.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MLISP_HOME
Config/state directory.  Resolved in priority order:
\-\-home flag > $MLISP_HOME > $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/mlisp/ > ~/.config/mlisp/
> /etc/mlisp/.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Wire up a bug package via procmail:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mlisp\-admin bugs\-add\-package myproj myproj\-bugs\-submit@lists.example.com
mlisp\-admin install\-bugs\-procmail myproj
.fi
.RE
.PP
Submit a test bug by email:
.PP
.RS
.nf
printf 'From: you@example.com\\r\\nSubject: test bug\\r\\n\\r\\n\
Package: myproj\\r\\nSeverity: normal\\r\\n\\r\\nDescription here\\r\\n' \\
  | mlisp\-bugs \-\-mode submit myproj
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mlisp (1),
.BR mlisp\-admin (1),
.BR mlisp\-intro (7)
.SH AUTHORS
Dwight Spencer <dwight@dapla.net>
.br
Da Planet Security \(em https://dapla.net/
