.TH MLISP\-INTRO 7 "June 2026" "mlisp 0.5" "Miscellaneous"
.SH NAME
mlisp\-intro \- introduction to the mlisp mailing list manager
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mlisp
is a compiled SBCL Common Lisp mailing list manager that replaces
.B smartlist
and
.B Mailman 2
in a procmail\-based mail environment.  It runs as a delivery agent,
not a daemon: each inbound message invokes the
.B mlisp
binary once via a procmail recipe.
.PP
This manual introduces the concepts needed to deploy and operate mlisp.
For command references see
.BR mlisp (1)
and
.BR mlisp\-admin (1).
.SH 1. CONCEPTS
.SS State directory
All list configuration, subscriber records, and operational state
live under a single directory,
.BR MLISP_HOME
(default
.IR ~/.config/mlisp ).
This directory contains:
.PP
.TP
.I state/state.sexp
List configs and subscriber database
.TP
.I state/audit.sexp
Append\-only event log
.TP
.I template/
Welcome, goodbye, help, and footer templates
.TP
.I bin/
Optional local sendmail wrapper
.SS List ID and subgroup
Every list has a
.IR list\-id ,
which is the first argument to the
.B mlisp
binary.  List IDs follow the namespace\-subgroup convention
(see section 5).
.SS S\-expression state
Configuration and subscriber records are stored as Common Lisp
property lists in
.IR state/state.sexp .
This file is human\-readable and can be inspected with any text editor
or queried with
.B mlisp\-admin show\-config
and
.BR mlisp\-admin list\-subs .
Never edit it while
.B mlisp
is actively processing messages.
.SH 2. QUICK START
.SS Install
Build from source:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sbcl \-\-non\-interactive \-\-load build.lisp
sbcl \-\-non\-interactive \-\-load build\-admin.lisp
install \-m 755 bin/mlisp bin/mlisp\-admin /usr/local/bin/
install \-m 644 src/man/mlisp.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
install \-m 644 src/man/mlisp\-admin.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
install \-m 644 src/man/mlisp\-intro.7 /usr/local/share/man/man7/
.fi
.RE
.SS Initialise and create your first namespace
.PP
.RS
.nf
export MLISP_HOME=~/.config/mlisp
mlisp\-admin init
mlisp\-admin add\-namespace myproject myproject@example.com
mlisp\-admin install\-procmail
.fi
.RE
.PP
This creates nine list records and appends nine procmail recipes to
.IR ~/.procmailrc .
.SS Send a test subscription
.PP
.RS
echo "subscribe" | mail \-s subscribe myproject\-request@example.com
.RE
.PP
You will receive a confirmation challenge.  Reply with
.I confirm <token>
to complete the subscription.
.SH 3. SUBSCRIPTION WORKFLOW
.SS Default: double opt\-in
When
.I :confirm\-subscribe
is
.I t
(the default for new lists), a subscribe request triggers a
challenge\-response flow:
.PP
.IP 1. 4
Subscriber sends
.I subscribe
to the \fI\-request\fR address.
.IP 2.
mlisp generates a 32\-character hex token, stores it in
.IR state/pending/<list\-id>.sexp ,
and mails the challenge to the subscriber.
.IP 3.
Subscriber replies with
.I confirm <token>
in the subject or body.
.IP 4.
mlisp validates the token, adds the subscriber with
.I consent\-method: double\-opt\-in
in the subscriber record, and sends the welcome message.
.PP
Tokens expire after
.I :confirm\-window\-hours
(default 48 hours).
.SS Immediate subscribe
Set
.I :confirm\-subscribe nil
to skip confirmation (compatible with smartlist behaviour):
.PP
.RS
mlisp\-admin set\-option myproject\-discuss confirm\-subscribe false
.RE
.SS NOMAIL (delivery suspension)
A subscriber can suspend delivery without unsubscribing by sending
.I nomail
to the \fI\-request\fR address.  Resume with
.I mail
or
.IR resume .
NOMAIL subscribers can still post; they are skipped at distribution time.
.SH 4. NAMESPACE STRUCTURE
The namespace\-subgroup model derives from smartlist and LISTSERV conventions.
A namespace
.I proj
creates addresses of the form \fIproj\-subgroup@host\fR.
.PP
.B mlisp\-admin add\-namespace proj proj@lists.example.com
.PP
creates all nine subgroup records.  Each subgroup has a distinct role;
see section 5.  The single \fIproj\-request@lists.example.com\fR address
handles all subscriber commands for the namespace.
.PP
The
.I subscribe
command accepts a subgroup name in the body:
.PP
.RS
.I subscribe discuss
.RE
.PP
subscribes the sender to
.IR proj\-discuss .
Without a subgroup name,
.I subscribe
defaults to
.IR proj\-discuss .
.SH 5. SUBGROUP ROLES
.TP
.B discuss
Subscriber\-writable general discussion.  The primary list for most
projects.  All subscribers can post.
.TP
.B announce
Owner\-post\-only notifications.  Only the address in
.I :owner\-address
can post.  Non\-owner posts are rejected.
.TP
.B devel
Patches, VCS activity, and development discussion.  Behaviorally
identical to
.IR discuss ,
but semantically distinct for projects that separate developer
and end\-user traffic.
.TP
.B distrib
Binary and file attachment releases.  Posts are stored in the
distribution archive and served to subscribers on request by
.BR mlisp\-distrib (1).
.TP
.B request
Admin command processor.  Handles subscribe, unsubscribe, help,
nomail, resume, confirm, and diagnose commands.  Not for human
discussion.
.TP
.B owner
Off\-list escalation.  Messages are forwarded directly to
.IR :owner\-addresses
and never shown to subscribers.  Used for abuse reports and
administrative contact.
.TP
.B security
Security disclosures.  Posts are held under embargo until the
release date set by
.IR "mlisp\-admin embargo" .
Typically configured with
.I :require\-signed t
so only GPG\-signed reports are accepted.
.TP
.B commits
Automated VCS/CI notifications.  Only the address in
.I :bot\-address
can post.  No subscriber replies.  Configure your CI system to
deliver commit notifications here.
.TP
.B users
End\-user support.  Identical to
.I discuss
but semantically distinct for projects that run separate developer
and user lists.
.SH 6. MODERATING A LIST
.SS Moderation queue
.PP
.RS
.nf
mlisp\-admin set\-option myproject\-discuss moderated true
mlisp\-admin hold\-queue myproject\-discuss
mlisp\-admin approve myproject\-discuss 1
mlisp\-admin reject  myproject\-discuss 2
.fi
.RE
.SS Emergency lock
Lock the list to hold all posts regardless of subscriber status:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mlisp\-admin lock myproject\-discuss \-\-reason "Under attack until 2026\-07\-01"
mlisp\-admin unlock myproject\-discuss
.fi
.RE
.SS Non\-member post policy
.PP
.RS
mlisp\-admin set\-option myproject\-discuss non\-member\-action hold
.RE
.SH 7. DIGEST MODE
Enable digest mode:
.PP
.RS
mlisp\-admin set\-option myproject\-discuss delivery\-mode digest
.RE
.PP
Add a cron entry to flush the digest daily:
.PP
.RS
0 12 * * * mlisp\-admin flush\-digest myproject\-discuss
.RE
.SH 8. BOUNCE MANAGEMENT
mlisp uses a time\-windowed multigram bounce threshold:
.IP \(bu 2
Hard bounces (5xx, \fIAction: failed\fR in the DSN) count toward removal.
.IP \(bu 2
Soft bounces (4xx, \fIAction: delayed\fR) increment \fI:soft\-bounce\-count\fR only
and never trigger removal.
.IP \(bu 2
A bounce resets the window if the gap since the previous bounce
exceeds \fI:bounce\-window\-days\fR (default 30).  This prevents
accumulated transient failures from removing active subscribers.
.PP
Enable VERP for per\-subscriber bounce attribution without DSN parsing:
.PP
.RS
mlisp\-admin set\-option myproject\-discuss verp true
.RE
.PP
View and reset bounce counts:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mlisp\-admin show\-bounces myproject\-discuss
mlisp\-admin clear\-bounces myproject\-discuss alice@example.com
.fi
.RE
.SH 9. PRIVACY AND GDPR
.TP
.B Hash contacts at rest
.RS
.nf
mlisp\-admin set\-option myproject\-discuss hash\-contacts true
.fi
.RE
Subscriber addresses are stored as SHA\-256 hashes.  Delivery uses
the hashed records.  Audit and LDIF export respect this setting.
.TP
.B Double opt\-in consent
Confirmed subscribers carry
.I consent\-method: double\-opt\-in
in their record.  Admin\-added subscribers carry
.IR consent\-method: admin\-add .
The consent method is included in CSV and LDIF exports for audit trails.
.TP
.B Right to erasure
.RS
.nf
mlisp\-admin rm\-sub myproject\-discuss alice@example.com
.fi
.RE
Writes an erasure audit event to \fIstate/audit.sexp\fR.
.SH 10. DMARC AND DELIVERABILITY
Strict DMARC domains (Gmail, Yahoo, and others with \fIp=reject\fR) cause
list mail to be rejected unless the From header is rewritten.
.PP
Enable automatic DMARC\-safe rewriting:
.PP
.RS
mlisp\-admin set\-option myproject\-discuss dmarc\-rewrite auto
.RE
.PP
With \fIdmarc\-rewrite auto\fR, mlisp performs a DNS TXT lookup on
\fI_dmarc.<sender\-domain>\fR and rewrites the From header only when
the sender's domain publishes \fIp=reject\fR or \fIp=quarantine\fR.
.PP
The rewritten message carries:
.PP
.RS
.nf
From: myproject\-discuss via alice@gmail.com
X\-Original\-From: alice@gmail.com
Reply\-To: alice@gmail.com
.fi
.RE
.PP
Enable RFC 8058 one\-click unsubscribe (required by Gmail and Apple Mail):
.PP
.RS
mlisp\-admin set\-option myproject\-discuss unsubscribe\-url https://lists.example.com/unsub/myproject\-discuss
.RE
.PP
mlisp does not sign outbound messages (that is the MTA's responsibility),
but it strips the original
.I DKIM\-Signature
from redistributed mail (which would be invalid) and preserves the
inbound
.I Authentication\-Results
as
.I X\-Original\-Authentication\-Results
for downstream audit.
.SH 11. PROCMAIL INTEGRATION
mlisp integrates with any MTA that can deliver to procmail.  On
.BR panix.com ,
this is the standard delivery path.  The generated recipe structure is:
.PP
.RS
.nf
# mlisp: <list\-id>
:0
* !^FROM_DAEMON
* !^FROM_MAILER
* !^Precedence: (bulk|junk|list)
* ^TO_<drop\-address>
| mlisp \-\-home <MLISP_HOME> <list\-id>
.fi
.RE
.PP
The \fI\-request\fR subgroup uses \fI\-\-mode request\fR.  The \fI:request\fR
subgroup itself gets a single recipe (not a \fI\-request\-request\fR pair).
.PP
Install or update recipes:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mlisp\-admin install\-procmail           # append to ~/.procmailrc
mlisp\-admin install\-procmail \-\-dry\-run  # preview without writing
.fi
.RE
.SH 12. MIGRATION FROM SMARTLIST
.TP
.B REQUIRED_OK
.I :require\-signed t
(GPG)
.TP
.B MODERATED
.I :moderated t
.TP
.B ADMIN
.I :owner\-address <addr>
.TP
.B REPLY_TO
.I :reply\-to\-munging list|poster|none
.TP
.B MAX_MESSAGE_LENGTH
.I :max\-message\-size\-kb N
.TP
.B HOST
Derived from
.I :drop\-address
.TP
Digest via cron
.I set\-option delivery\-mode digest
+ cron
.I flush\-digest
.TP
.B .allow
file
No direct equivalent; use
.I :non\-member\-action discard
or add allowed senders as subscribers
.PP
To migrate subscribers from a smartlist
.I list.subscribers
file:
.PP
.RS
mlisp\-admin add\-sub\-batch myproject\-discuss list.subscribers
.RE
.SH 13. MIGRATION FROM MAILMAN
Mailman 2 exports members as a plain list of addresses.  Export with:
.PP
.RS
list_members \-o members.txt mylist
.RE
.PP
Then import:
.PP
.RS
.nf
mlisp\-admin add\-sub\-batch myproject\-discuss members.txt
.fi
.RE
.PP
Configuration mapping:
.TP
.I reply_goes_to_list
.I :reply\-to\-munging list
.TP
.I max_message_size
.I :max\-message\-size\-kb N
.TP
.I default_member_moderation
.I :moderated t
.TP
.I advertised
No equivalent (all lists are public by default)
.TP
.I archive
Set
.I :archive\-url
and configure Maildir
.TP
.I dkim_enabled
.I :dmarc\-rewrite auto
.TP
.I member_posting_only
.I :non\-member\-action reject
(default)
.SH 14. FILES
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/state.sexp
List config and subscriber DB
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/audit.sexp
Append\-only event log
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/held/<list>.sexp
Held message queue
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/pending/<list>.sexp
Confirmation token queue
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/dedup/<list>.sexp
Message\-ID dedup ring buffer
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/digest/<list>.sexp
Digest message buffer
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/ratelimit/<list>.sexp
Per\-sender rate limit window
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/templates/<list>.welcome.sexp
Welcome template
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/templates/<list>.goodbye.sexp
Goodbye template
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/templates/<list>.help.sexp
Help response template
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/templates/<list>.footer.sexp
Compliance footer template
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/var/archive/<list>/
Maildir archive (if enabled)
.SH 15. PLUGIN FILTERS
mlisp supports external filter programs at two pipeline hook points.
Filters are arbitrary executables that receive the message on stdin and
return a modified (or unmodified) message on stdout.
.PP
.B Filter exit code contract:
.TP
.B 0
Pass\&\&\&\&\&\&\&\& Continue with stdout as the new message.
.TP
.B 1
Reject\&\&\&\&\&\& mlisp exits 1; sendmail returns a bounce to sender.
.TP
.B 2
Hold\&\&\&\&\&\&\&\& Message goes to the moderation queue; mlisp exits 0.
.TP
.B 3
Discard\&\&\&\& Message is silently dropped; mlisp exits 0.
.PP
Configure filters per list:
.PP
.RS
.nf
# Spam filter before all processing:
mlisp\-admin set\-option mylist pre\-filter /usr/local/lib/mlisp/filters/spamassassin

# Gemini archive after distribution headers are assembled:
mlisp\-admin set\-option mylist post\-filter /usr/local/lib/mlisp/filters/gemini\-archive

# Multiple filters (space\-separated, run in order; first non\-zero stops chain):
mlisp\-admin set\-option mylist pre\-filter "/path/spamassassin /path/clamav"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Note: header names are stored in UPPERCASE by the mlisp parser.
Filter scripts that match or modify headers must use uppercase field names
(e.g., \fISUBJECT:\fR not \fISubject:\fR).
.PP
Example filter scripts are in \fIetc/filters/\fR:
\fIspamassassin\fR (SpamAssassin pre\-filter),
\fIclamav\fR (ClamAV pre\-filter),
\fIgemini\-archive\fR (post\-filter that writes to a Gemini capsule).
.SH 16. SUBSCRIBER SELF\-SERVICE COMMANDS
Subscribers send commands to the \fI\-request\fR address by email.
.PP
.TP
.B info
List description, posting rules, and command reference.
.TP
.B who [\fIlist\fR]
Subscriber list (only if \fI:advertised t\fR; default is private).
.TP
.B query [\fIlist\fR]
Your own delivery settings: mode, NOMAIL status, bounce count.
.TP
.B set \fIlist\fR mail|nomail|digest
Change your delivery mode.  \fIset list mail\fR resumes after NOMAIL.
.TP
.B search \fIkeyword\fR [in \fIlist\fR]
Search the Maildir archive.  Requires \fI:search\-enabled t\fR:
.RS
mlisp\-admin set\-option mylist search\-enabled true
.RE
.TP
.B index [\fIlist\fR]
List archived messages with sequence numbers.
.TP
.B get \fIlist\fR \fIN\fR
Retrieve archived message \fIN\fR (from \fBindex\fR output).
.TP
.B files [\fIlist\fR]
List files in the \fI\-distrib\fR archive.
.SH 17. FILE DISTRIBUTION (ALLFIX\-COMPATIBLE)
The \fI\-distrib\fR subgroup handles file distribution.
.PP
Add a file to the archive and announce it (AllFix HATCH equivalent):
.PP
.RS
mlisp\-admin hatch myproject\-distrib release\-1.0.tar.gz \-\-description "Release 1.0"
.RE
.PP
Subscribers can retrieve files by sending \fBfiles\fR or \fBget myproject\-distrib \fIN\fR
to the \fI\-request\fR address.
The magic filename \fIFILES.BBS\fR (AllFix convention) is served by the \fBfiles\fR command.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mlisp (1),
.BR mlisp\-admin (1),
.BR mlisp\-distrib (1),
.BR procmail (1),
.BR sendmail (8)
.SH AUTHORS
Dwight Spencer <dwight@dapla.net>
.br
Da Planet Security \(em https://dapla.net/
