.TH MLISP 1 "June 2026" "mlisp 0.8" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mlisp \- compiled SBCL mailing list manager (list delivery agent)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mlisp
[\fB\-\-home\fR \fIdir\fR]
[\fB\-\-mode\fR \fInormal\fR|\fIrequest\fR|\fIbounce\fR]
\fIlist\-id\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mlisp
reads a raw RFC 5322 message from standard input and processes it
according to the named list's configuration.  It is invoked from a
.BR procmail (1)
recipe for each inbound message.
.PP
.B mlisp
replaces
.B smartlist
and is compatible with the smartlist procmail integration pattern.
All state is stored in plain S-expression files under
.IR MLISP_HOME .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-home " dir"
Override the state directory.  Equivalent to setting
.BR MLISP_HOME .
Takes precedence over the environment variable.
.TP
.BI \-\-mode " mode"
Processing mode.  One of:
.RS
.TP
.B normal
Default.  Full processing pipeline: daemon check, loop detection,
subscriber check, distribution.
.TP
.B request
Command processing mode.  Parses subscribe, unsubscribe, help,
nomail, resume, confirm, diagnose commands from subject or body.
Used for the \fI\-request\fR subgroup address.
.TP
.B bounce
Bounce processing mode.  Parses DSN (RFC 3464) or VERP-encoded
return address to attribute the bounce to a subscriber and
increment their bounce count.
.RE
.SH LIST PROCESSING PIPELINE
When invoked in
.B normal
mode, the following checks run in order.  The first failure exits immediately.
.PP
.B 0. Max message size
If \fI:max\-message\-size\-kb\fR is set and the message exceeds it, the
message is rejected (exit 1).
.PP
.B 1. Loop detection
If the list's loop header (\fIX\-BeenThere:\fR) is already present, the
message is silently dropped (exit 0) to prevent mail loops.
.PP
.B 2. Daemon discrimination
Messages from mailer\-daemons, null return paths, auto\-submitted
messages, and
.I Precedence: junk
are silently dropped.
.PP
.B 3. Duplicate suppression
The Message\-ID is checked against a 24\-hour ring buffer.  Duplicates
are silently dropped.
.PP
.B 3y. Attachment policy
If \fI:attachment\-policy\fR is \fIreject\fR and the message contains
non\-text attachments, the message is rejected.
.PP
.B 3z0. Subject keyword filtering
If \fI:subject\-allow\fR patterns are set, only matching subjects pass.
If \fI:subject\-deny\fR patterns are set, matching subjects are held
or rejected according to \fI:subject\-filter\-action\fR.
.PP
.B 3z1. Rate limiting
If \fI:max\-posts\-per\-day\fR is set and the sender has exceeded it,
the message is held (default), rejected, or discarded.
.PP
.B 3z. List locking
If the list is locked (\fI:locked t\fR), all posts go to the held queue.
.PP
.B 4. Subgroup routing
.RS
.TP
.B :request
Command processing.  Subscribe, unsubscribe, help, nomail, resume,
confirm, and diagnose commands are recognised in subject or body.
.TP
.B :announce
Owner\-post\-only.  The sender must match \fI:owner\-address\fR.
Non\-owner posts are rejected.
.TP
.B :owner
Forward\-only.  The message is forwarded to \fI:owner\-addresses\fR
and not distributed to subscribers.
.TP
.B :commits
Bot\-post\-only.  The sender must match \fI:bot\-address\fR.
Non\-bot posts are rejected.
.TP
.B :security
If \fI:embargoed\-until\fR is set and in the future, posts are held
in the embargo queue.
.TP
.B :discuss / :users / :devel / :distrib
Normal subscriber\-writable distribution.
.RE
.PP
.B 5. GPG / signing check
If \fI:require\-signed t\fR, posts without a valid GPG signature are rejected.
.PP
.B 6. Moderation queue
If the list is moderated (\fI:moderated t\fR), posts go to the held queue.
.PP
.B 7. Auto\-subscribe
If \fI:auto\-subscribe t\fR and the sender is not subscribed, they are
added before distribution.
.PP
.B 8. Subscriber check
If the sender is not subscribed and \fI:auto\-subscribe\fR is nil, the
\fI:non\-member\-action\fR policy applies: \fIreject\fR (default),
\fIhold\fR, or \fIdiscard\fR.
.PP
.B 9. Digest buffering
If \fI:delivery\-mode digest\fR, the message is appended to the digest
buffer and not immediately distributed.
.PP
.B 10. Distribution
The message is delivered individually to each non\-NOMAIL subscriber
via
.BR sendmail (8).
RFC 2369 List\-* headers, DMARC rewriting, VERP envelope sender,
Reply\-To munging, subject tagging, and compliance footer are applied.
Existing DKIM\-Signature headers are stripped.
.SH SUBGROUP ROLES
mlisp uses a namespace\-subgroup address model.  A namespace
.I mlisp
creates addresses of the form \fImlisp\-subgroup@host\fR:
.PP
.TP
.I mlisp\-discuss
Subscriber\-writable general discussion
.TP
.I mlisp\-announce
Owner\-post\-only notifications
.TP
.I mlisp\-devel
Patches and VCS traffic
.TP
.I mlisp\-distrib
Binary/file attachment releases
.TP
.I mlisp\-request
Admin commands (subscribe/unsubscribe/help)
.TP
.I mlisp\-owner
Owner contact (not subscriber\-visible)
.TP
.I mlisp\-security
Security disclosures (GPG, embargo\-capable)
.TP
.I mlisp\-commits
Automated VCS/CI notifications (bot\-post\-only)
.TP
.I mlisp\-users
End\-user support
.PP
Use
.B mlisp\-admin add\-namespace
to create all nine subgroups at once.
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Message processed successfully (delivered, held, or discarded by policy).
.TP
.B 1
Message rejected.  Sendmail will bounce to sender.
.TP
.B 2
Fatal error (state unreadable, SBCL crash).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MLISP_HOME
Directory containing list state.  Default:
.IR ~/.config/mlisp .
.TP
.B MLISP_SENDMAIL
Path to sendmail\-compatible binary.  Default:
.IR /usr/sbin/sendmail .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/state.sexp
List configuration and subscriber database (S\-expression format).
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/audit.sexp
Append\-only audit log of all list events.
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/held/\fIlist\-id\fR.sexp
Held\-for\-moderation message queue.
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/pending/\fIlist\-id\fR.sexp
Pending double\-opt\-in confirmation tokens.
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/dedup/\fIlist\-id\fR.sexp
Recent Message\-ID ring buffer for duplicate suppression.
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/ratelimit/\fIlist\-id\fR.sexp
Per\-sender rate\-limit rolling window.
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/state/digest/\fIlist\-id\fR.sexp
Pending digest message buffer.
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/templates/\fIlist\-id\fR.welcome.sexp
Welcome message sent on subscription.
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/templates/\fIlist\-id\fR.goodbye.sexp
Goodbye message sent on unsubscription.
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/templates/\fIlist\-id\fR.help.sexp
Help response for the \fIhelp\fR command.
.TP
.I $MLISP_HOME/templates/\fIlist\-id\fR.footer.sexp
Compliance footer appended to every distributed message.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Typical procmail recipe (generated by
.BR "mlisp\-admin install\-procmail" ):
.PP
.RS
.nf
# mlisp: mlisp\-discuss
:0
* !^FROM_DAEMON
* !^FROM_MAILER
* !^Precedence: (bulk|junk|list)
* ^TO_mlisp\-discuss@panix.com
| mlisp \-\-home ~/.config/mlisp mlisp\-discuss

# mlisp: mlisp\-request
:0
* ^TO_mlisp\-request@panix.com
| mlisp \-\-home ~/.config/mlisp \-\-mode request mlisp\-request
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mlisp\-admin (1),
.BR mlisp\-distrib (1),
.BR mlisp\-intro (7),
.BR procmail (1),
.BR sendmail (8)
.PP
RFC 2369 (List\-* headers),
RFC 2919 (List\-Id),
RFC 3464 (Delivery Status Notifications),
RFC 6376 (DKIM),
RFC 8058 (One\-Click Unsubscribe)
.SH AUTHORS
Dwight Spencer <dwight@dapla.net>
.br
Da Planet Security \(em https://dapla.net/
